hey curious minds I'm dr. Becky welcome
back to my channel and today I want to
talk about something called hogs object
now I mentioned this thing in passing on
one of Brady's channels deep sky videos
a couple of months ago when I was
talking about inner ring galaxies and I
said oh this is nothing like hogs object
which has this big massive ring we
showed a video of it in the video and
there were all these comments that were
like whoa like what is that
that looks amazing tell me more about
that and it's not a Messier object so it
kind of falls out of the remit of these
guy videos but I figured why not talk
about it on here because it is a really
really cool object so this is hogs
object
it's a galaxy so a city of stars like
our Milky Way but 600 billion light
years away and you'll see it's formed of
like two distinct parts right it's got
the central sort of elliptical blob
--is-- component and it's kind of like
red and dead it's like not forming stars
anymore and then you've got this outer
ring component that's very very bright
blue star forming lots of new star
formation even seen these little clumps
all around really cool thing is that
they're very distinct components like
there is a very clear gap between that
central sort of core of the galaxy and
then this really bright ring around the
outside so when it was discovered back
in 1950 people didn't actually know that
it was a galaxy like it looked so weird
from other galaxies that we've seen of
these beautiful spiral shapes or just
plain ellipticals and so in the sort of
discovery paper
hoog originally said it's probably a
planetary nebula so a star a new form
star that's forming planets or it's
maybe even what we call a gravitational
lens so that's when you get a foreground
galaxy that's usually like something
incredibly massive so those are the
elliptical galaxies that acts as a
gravitational lens to magnify a
background galaxy which probably is
forming stars and I look blue and you
get what's called an Einstein ring
around it and so in very early imaging
of this galaxy that's what we thought
the blue ring was because we didn't have
details enough imaging or details enough
observations to be able to say is the
ring at the same distance as that
central core of the galaxy or not and so
it wasn't until like 1987 that someone
actually confirm
that ring is actually the same distance
away as the central core and therefore
it is actually one galaxy in itself
rather than like two separate objects so
that was confirmed with the redshift so
a spectra and then better imaging showed
that actually that cannot be a
gravitational ring gravitational rings
are from really distant objects so
they're incredibly smooth structures you
don't see a lot of detail whereas this
you can see the individual clumps of
star formation in so it clearly is a
very distinct structure in itself it's
not something that is a background
galaxy that's been lens into the shape
of a ring it is actually a structure
that is the shape of an actual ring so
these kind of galaxies are incredibly
rare we think you know like less than
0.1 of a percent of galaxies are these
ring like galaxies so NGC 1291 and pgc
1071 for that have been seen like this
as well so ironically considering the
fact that these things are incredibly
incredibly rare there is actually
another ring galaxy in this image from
the Hubble Space Telescope that we have
of hopes object which is sort of at the
one o'clock position just up here it's
this tiny ring galaxy in itself that's
very very distant compared to hopes
object so really really cosmic
coincidence that the fact that the two
ring structures actually line up
considering how rare these things are
now there's another class of object that
we do consider rings as well they're
called polar ring galaxies but they
differ massively from hugs object
because they're actually you can see
that their forms and these trainwreck
mergers of galaxies where two galaxies
come together and the gravitational
forces in the interaction or the
collision of the galaxies just means
that structure gets torn apart and you
end up creating this sort of ring light
structure that's sort of a tidal
stripping of the gas in a galaxy around
the other galaxies in that you form this
pull the ring structure and those things
are also very rare because you have to
have a certain angle of incidence that
two galaxies have to come in at in the
collision to actually form one of these
rings but you can see when you look at
images of these polar and galaxies that
they have been caused by these
drastically catastrophic events where
gravity is going to tear them apart and
they're sort of disorder
and they're sort of sloppy and all over
the place whereas hogs
object you can see it's so structured
and even as if some calm wonderful
process has actually formed it so just
to give you an idea of scale of this
thing the inner core of the galaxy is
about 17 light-years across the inner
ring is about 75 light-years across and
then the outer edge of the ring is a
hundred and twenty-five light-years
across so the actual gap that sort of
really distinct empty space is actually
broader than the ring itself and if we
think about that in terms of scale of
our own Milky Way our own Milky Way is
out a hundred thousand light-years
across this is about 25 percent bigger
than the Milky Way so this is a huge
galaxy and the thing is we have
absolutely no idea how this thing formed
so the polar ring galaxies where those
rings going over the poles and you can
clearly tell that some catastrophic
process has formed it like we very fully
agree on the fact that there was clearly
a merger here and that's what formed
these objects but for something like
hogs object where you can see that it's
nice and settled and sort of some calm
processes formed it there's no accepted
theory for how this thing has formed
there's always something wrong with a
proposed theory and so we've never
really come across one that sort of been
accepted as the general theory for how
these beautifully ordered ring galaxies
have formed so one of the first theories
to actually try and explain what had
happened in hogs object was from 1985
and so the theory was that it was
actually a transition stage for barred
galaxies so galaxies with these really
strong like linear features running
through the center that spiral arms sort
of come out of the ends of and so the
idea was that a bar would sort of
processed through the galaxies and
rotate round it would push gas into the
outskirts and form this sort of ring
structure and that would trigger star
formation out in the outskirts as he
pushed more and more gas outwards then
the bar itself would dissipate so the
stars and gas in the bar would somehow
either progress outwards or even sink
into the center into that sort of
elliptical shape
in the middle the spherical sort of blob
and then you would be left with the blob
and the ring and you would be left with
something that had had recent star
formation in the outskirts of the ring
whereas all the sort of old and dead
stars have sank to the middle which is
what you see in hogs object the thing is
in that scenario you would expect that
the thing in the center wouldn't be
beautifully round like isn't hopes
object you would get something that was
sort of squashed and oval-shaped from
the fact that you still had some sort of
reflection that they used to be that
sort of linear structure running through
the centre and so you would get that
sort of oval shape which is not what you
see in hogs object and then also the
kinematics when you look at the speed of
the stars as well that didn't support
the idea that a bar had funneled in the
stars into the centre either and so that
theory was sort of dismissed pretty
quickly then in 1987 it was another
theory proposed that went back to this
idea of a merger or an accretion event
that could have formed the ring but not
in it as a like drastic as a way as say
the polar ring objects so this theory
said what if the elliptical galaxies in
the center had like a minor Bergeron a
major merger so a minor merger being
something where you have a massive
galaxy and something like piddly comes
along a major merger is where you have a
massive galaxy and another massive
galaxy comes along and so they're sort
of going to be fighting for this sort of
gravitational dominance in that merger
whereas if you have a minor merger where
only something little comes along this
one's this massive one in the center is
clearly gonna win out so the idea is you
would have this smaller galaxy come in
into the sort of gravitational influence
of the larger galaxy and it would slowly
get stripped and sort of torn apart into
a flow ring if it would come in at
exactly sort of the right angle and of
incidence on to the other galaxies
astronomers also try to measure the gas
mass in that ring like structure around
the outside so they're hydrogen gas that
you need to form stars they said how
much is there and it turns out there's
more there in that ring than there is in
the entire Milky Way and so it is not
possible to have gotten that much
stellar or gas mass into a system like
from a dwarf galaxy or from a very small
galaxy because you would lead something
that was as big or if not bigger as the
Milky Way to actually get that much gas
mass into that kind of structure so that
ruled out that theory as well then back
in 2011 another group of authors tried
to look at this so they took more
observations they tried to get the
kinematics of the actual structures
themselves as well and tried to figure
out what was going on and they proposed
a new hypothesis that said that the two
components had actually formed
separately despite now the one object
and so first of all they looked at how
the core could have formed now hopes
object it's actually in a very what with
a low-density environment it's not got a
lot of galaxies around it it's not in a
group or a cluster it's very very
isolated so the nearest galaxies to it
is actually 10 million light years away
now compare that with the Milky Way and
dromeda which is our biggest nearest
neighbor but you know you've got them
small and large with much lenok clouds
around it as well which are much closer
but Andromeda is two and a half million
light-years away
so it's very very isolated there's
nothing around it that's going to affect
its structure in a couple of billion
years or interact with it
gravitationally so because it's so
isolated that's weird that it would have
an elliptical galaxy at the center
elliptical galaxies tend to be found in
places where you are gonna have a lot of
mergers because you destroy spiral
structure emerges and you sink
everything to the center and you form
these big spherical shapes so one idea
is that it could be the sort of fossil
or remnant of a group of cluster of
galaxies that have all thanked together
and eventually merged and you're left
with just this one elliptical and it's
sort of the fossil of what used to be
there but these authors also suggest
that you could actually form this little
galaxy just from your dissipation or
collapse of the stars into this smooth
spherical structure as well because it
is quite small relative to the big
ellipticals that we generally tend to
know then they said the ring could then
form by itself around that spherical
structure if you had very slow accretion
of just the intergalactic medium so if
there is gas there is sort of still
where those galaxies used to be in a in
a group or cluster that used to exist
before the old galaxies merged together
to form at central electrical
then that gas could slowly be accreted
around that spherical object and
possibly start star-forming and form
this ring now that theory doesn't
actually cover why they would a form a
ring rather than forming like a disk
just like a pure disk around that
spherical center like we see in many of
the galaxies where you have that sort of
central bulge and then the flat disk
around it so it had some points lacking
in that theory
so actually very recently back in
February 2018
Elena Banach over actually analyzed the
motions of sort of particles in the
potential of hopes objects so looked at
it very theoretically with a lot of
maths to say what actually would the
orbits look like around this kind of
structure so they found that if you take
that central spherical component and
then you take the ring around it as well
and you say where do the forces between
the two objects balance the
gravitational forces then you actually
find that that is on the very inner part
of the ring of hugs object and then they
said okay well where is also the last
stable circular orbit around that
central spherical structure as well so
that comes from obviously you know where
can the Stars be actually held in a
circular orbit without being thrown off
their orbits because they're too far
away from that central structure or they
get too close to the ring and then
they're disturbed and so they actually
found that that last sort of stable
circular orbit is within the radius of
that ring like structure in hogs object
and so what you're going to end up with
is this gap where circular orbits around
that central component are just not
possible then it's impossible to have
something there and so you end up with
this sort of mass gap where no stars or
even gas particles are actually allowed
to orbit because you have something
around that central component so that
sort of analytical look at it doesn't
actually answer how the ring came to be
all it tells us is why you have that
very distinct gap in hogs object but if
you combine it with that previous
back in 2011 the fact that you might be
able to have accretion of gas onto that
spherical structure from the
intergalactic medium perhaps where a
group or a cluster of galaxies used to
be before they all merged to form that
central elliptical then perhaps you
actually might be able to form this ring
then it makes sense as to why you might
have gotten this ring if stuff started
to build up there then the orbits would
become more and more unstable around the
central circular object until you had
this very ordered ring shape with this
very clear gap so not all the answers
are there yet but we have a better idea
at least than we did 30 years ago but
still kind of unsolved no one yet is an
agreement of the idea of the accretion
and then the stable circular orbits that
prevent you forming a disk and sort of
give you that ring but more observations
and more simulations will be able to
tell us more about this object it still
is one of these unsolved mysteries so
that's all I've got time to go through
this week because it certainly come down
Singh is literally just about to start
and I cannot miss it so until next week
dr. B over and out
you